[Music]
and thank you so much
to honor is for organizing this very
timely conference on overcoming
inequalities in a fractured world and
the inequalities get so stuck by the day
in the opening page of my new book
oneness versus the 1% has just come out
in India and will be published in other
countries as time goes you might
remember 2008 was the collapse of Wall
Street and tax money bailed it out the
billionaires got richer so in 2010 388
billionaires controlled as much wealth
as the bottom half of humanity this
number came down 277 in 2011 159 in 2012
292 in 2013 280 in 2014 62 in 2016 and
it shriveled to a mere 8 in 2017 this
year it is 5
the 2016 much data was that the six
richest had three hundred forty three
billion and by the next year they had
four hundred and two billion and their
money is then managed by the asset
management funds which did not exist
before globalization they were
insignificant but they are the
determining factor in the economy today
the two biggest Vanguard and Blackrock
we normally think of Wall Street and
Goldman Sachs looked like nothing today
they are very small players financially
so in 2008 Vanguard was less than a
trillion and Blackrock was a trillion
2012 and I rose to 2.2 trillion
Blackrock was 3.3 when I started this
book in after the Paris event because
that's the event that forced me to look
at what is going on
when God was 3-trillion within a year by
the time this went to the publisher and
was published within a year it was four
trillion how did how do the asset
managers make a trillion a year India's
GDP is 1.3 trillion will and 1.3 billion
people very hardworking peasants very
hardworking women and all of that work
counts for nothing but the speculation
is growing by the day I've been looking
at of course I started to look at
agriculture because of what happened the
fracturing of the most prosperous part
of India the state of Punjab I did my
MSC owners in physics from Punjab and it
was a peaceful land the richest state in
province of India by 84 it had erupted
in violence and those days I was working
for the United Nations University on a
major programme of conflicts over
resources within peace and global
transformation and I said something's
going on here
that needs to be looked at because when
I was collecting data on conflicts over
rivers Punjab was the highest but by
June of 1984 the story was only about
religion the resources had disappeared
the rivers had disappeared the farmers
incomes had disappeared the farmers
blockade of June the 4th
I disappeared where they were saying if
we can't choose what we grow if we can't
decide how we'll grow it if we can't
determine the price at which to sell if
we can't determine when the water of our
own rivers will flow to our field we're
living under slavery that was the way
they were framing it by June the 4th
army was sent to the Golden Temple and
when I did the book which became
violence of the Green Revolution unrest
had a very important role because till
that time everyone was saying oh hi
leading varieties miracle never again
hunger
the reason the Green Revolution was
called the Green Revolution was it was
supposed to be an alternative to the red
you remember there was a red revolution
happening in the world at that time and
the promise given was through commerce
and through the chemicals they'd be
prosperity and through the prosperity
there'd be peace and the Nobel Peace
Prize was given for the Green Revolution
to Norman Borlaug but there wasn't peace
in Punjab in 1984 and that's the
question that I had in my mind and it
was a major unrest report which had said
they should the new varieties bred for
chemicals should not be called high
yielding varieties because they are not
high yielding in and of themselves their
high response varieties and should be
called HRVs not hy Vees and that is what
opened up my mind so much to look at the
fact that
as the soil was losing its fertility as
the monocultures and the chemicals were
leading to a decline and the withdrawal
of subsidies on which the beginning was
based was making the economy collapse
that's what made the farmers rice
because they were not higher yielding
varieties and it was in this building 31
years ago I had been invited to a
meeting that took place outside Geneva
it was a retreat with the agrochemical
Giants of that time the some of the UN
agencies and scientists and civil
society members who had been looking at
Dresden done the book on agriculture but
that was about my own view expertise but
I was called and I came to learn and at
that meeting the agrochemical industry
said we are too small now those days
Seba and Sanders were sitting separately
in that meeting they merged a few years
later to become Novartis and emerged
with Astra and Seneca to become Syngenta
and now Syngenta has merged with CEM
China and Monsanto has merged with
bhaiyya and Dow has merged with DuPont
but in fact they are all owned by the
asset management funds I have a table at
the end of this book on the the largest
shares now in these companies is not
individual shareholders it's the
Baroness
and they decide whether GMOs will be
pushed or not they decide whether the
new genetic engineering technologies the
gene drives the gene editing will happen
or not they determine wherever there's a
potential for power control and profits
Microsoft was not a very big player who
are you know the big the biggest name it
is be gates for nearly 15 years as the
richest he lost the richest man's place
to Jeff Bezos
Jeff Bezos did not exist 20 years ago he
said in an interview it must have been
in financial times which I would have
read while traveling
he said India got him to the top place
because last year the tax laws were
changed and I support Indian farmers who
really worked with them to save seeds
biodiversity do organic farming and
their economic sovereignty of doing
their own marketing so we you know the
20 farmers who've grown this pulse in
this place or this rice in this place
what we facilitate is that is a truck to
bring it all together in this used to
sit in the truck and bring it to the
market and as long as they could prove
that this is their produce with their
land title there was no taxation and
they could move at least within the
provinces they could move freely
this year the truck wasn't allowed to
move and I did a quick calculation what
individual farmers would have to pay for
farmers is all that Jeff wave boy so
space for an entire state he doesn't pay
sales tax anyway he does a sick baby you
know he's got storages but he doesn't
give pay property tax
and I think these are issues worth
investigating because not only are there
tax avoidance and a lot of the
billionaires money is in the tax havens
but they worked out brilliant ways of
not paying taxes so at that meeting of
87 the second thing that happened was
and they said we can only make money now
through selling GMOs which didn't exist
at that time this is 1987 GMOs were
commercialized in 92 they said but we
have to push GMOs because it's the only
way we can claim patents on seed and
it's the royalty collections that will
make our future profits and then they
said but in a Europe and America are
very small markets for agriculture it's
the third world that's where the farmers
are that's where the royalties will come
from so we got to have a global treaty
and it's in this building that I first
heard the word GATT I didn't even know
there was something called GATT the
general agreement on trade and tariffs
which became the WTO and the trade
related intellectual property rights
agreement which was being put into it
this is what a monsanto representative
said in this industry has identified a
major problem for international trade
and what was the problem they had
identified their farmers safe seeds that
was a big problem
the farmers save seeds and have seen
some rarity so they went on to say it
crafted a solution reduced it to a
concrete proposal and sold it to our own
and other governments the industries and
traders of the world commerce have
played simultaneously the role of
patients diagnosticians
and prescribing physicians but i heard
about the Gajan trip so i started to
work on this i started to come back to
Geneva to work with our embassy to get
and start telling them the issues of the
seed
and we managed to change the draft that
had been wrought by industry with two
exception exemptions the first it was
going to be a requirement for every
country to patent everything in all life
forms we managed to put in clause 27 3b
of trips an exclusion from patentability
of plants and animals and essentially
biological processes in the case of seed
there was an attempt to put you pause
which is the pre deserts treaty and we
put in there effective sue generous
system that countries could write their
own laws so in India we wrote a law and
I was invited by the government of that
time to be part of the expert group
which actually has farmers rights built
into it a recognition that farmers are
breeders and have rights and in terms of
how patent law we work we had to change
it it had to be amended but we put in it
article 3 J which says plants animal
seeds and their parts cannot be patented
because they are not human inventions so
I've just yeah we did a big biodiversity
Congress and my colleagues said it's we
really should consolidate everything
we've done put it together all these
different laws the biodiversity lower
the farmers rights law the patent law
and so there is another new book it's
called origin you know what's the source
of life is it when Santos invention is
its lab there's a Supreme Court decision
in the United States which actually says
seed is a self-replicating machine
invented by Monsanto and even 20 years
down the line if you buy grain it is
still the self-replicating machine and
you can't draw it out it's a very very
faced famous case of a farmer who had
bought soya bean in an elevator and was
sued by Monsanto and he took the case
all the way to the Supreme Court and
this was the final decision at the same
time in our courts we were getting
decisions that seed is not an invention
and Monsanto doesn't have patents and
they were collecting
illegally they had made the cotton price
jump up to eighty thousand percent more
and if you look at the epidemic of
farmer suicides in India we've lost more
than three hundred thousand farmers
since globalization eighty four percent
of them are farmers who had got into
debt for bt cotton this book is
published by niraj and i'm very very
happy and proud that a commerce minister
who's still working on these issues at
the WTO that indigenous knowledge cannot
be pirated and that there needs to be a
bringing in to a revision which was a
mandatory revision which hasn't been
done still waiting a revision based on
what has been called in unrest the eco
social contract a simple ontological
fact then life is not a manufacturer and
an invention and the human right that
farmers have a right to save an extreme
since the only viable way to do
affordable farming and it's the only
viable way to do farming in times of the
vulnerability of climate change because
it's only evolutionary breeding five
farmers that can keep up with the
changes we are witnessing there are
claims that genetic engineering will
give us climate resilience seeds we've
done a book and in this in this book too
there's a very big section as well as in
oneness how so much of the claims of the
new seeds is really seats that farmers
had already evolved of salt tolerance of
flood tolerance of drought tolerance and
all that's happening now is either just
taking that seed and reading its genome
and guessing guessing which part of the
genome contributes to what trait so if I
go to a seed bank and all the seeds are
in the collections of the CGI our system
they're sitting in Svalbard in what's
called the Doomsday Seed Vault
and with them is a passport data which
tells you what trick the seed has that
it's a drought resistant so I take a
thousand drought resistant seeds and I
put them through a computer reading and
find through an algorithm and then do a
guesswork which will be that they
literally say which will be the hundred
lottery ticket that will win me the
possibility of a pattern and you patent
you've done nothing you don't even know
what the seed is but you guess that this
part of the genome is what's going to be
the contributor than one thousand five
hundred patterns on climate resilient
seeds deregulation was a very very
important part of the making of the
billionaires and the making of
inequality so a year after the WTO was
formed the first ministerial was in
Singapore and the first thing they did
was remove all taxation on the IT
industry that's where Microsoft got so
rich if they were paying the taxes they
wouldn't have and if they didn't have
IPRs on software we wouldn't have two
simple facts is what made Gates come to
the top but deregulation isn't just
deregulation it is also simultaneously
as I have witnessed in my country a
making illegal of the daily lives of
people so when it came to the whole seed
issue the talk used to be we have to
find ways to make it illegal for farmers
to save seeds that was the problem and
intellectual property rights were
supposed to be the tool it's just that
we build the movements and we changed
the trajectory but I have had to deal
with the making illegal of our cold
press
all Mel's of the village level in in 98
- dumped soil they just worked out an
amazing new law the local edible oil had
to be banned because that poor villager
with two bullets and his little
cold-pressed Mel houdin's and no cash
the community will bring oil seeds you
take out the oil the oil cake is left
for us feed for your animals it's an
economy that's totally circular
overnight band on what grounds that
there's no lab and no chemists and they
even did it to Gandhi's Ghani we call
the cold-pressed middle honey even if
the Taconic are these Fanny and I had to
go I was invited to come and join a
subhead rare cetera was Gandhi's word
for the force of truth for
non-cooperation and we had to save
Gandhi's Ghani through a non-cooperation
action saying you know this is the
purest oil in the world and we will
continue to run this mill and we will
not allow it to be closed
making fractures where they shouldn't be
fractures and integrating what should
not be integrated the glass-steagall and
used to keep people savings separate
from the investment banks and this was
removed through the removal the
speculators managed to get hold of the
pension funds savings and everything
else and that's part of how the whole
system exclude exploded and as Joel
Kurtzman has said in the financial
economy somewhere between 20 to 50 times
I think it is now about a hundred to two
hundred times as much bigger than when
he wrote it
then the real economy is not the economy
of trade but of speculation its commerce
is in financial instrument and while
it's ultra high tech infrastructure
straddles the grow band move several
trillion dollars a day between the major
and
nodes of the network it is largely
unregulated few people realize money in
its traditional sense has met its device
fewer still have post to reflect on its
impact now two years ago exactly two
years ago cash in India was banned the
big notes 500 and 1000 rupees 8 p.m.
lecture not by the central bank governor
by the Prime Minister and in no time by
12 o'clock Paulo cash was illegal now
Indians live in economies of self
organized systems and that means you
know that poor woman who's sweeping the
streets at the end of her life might
have saved five hundred thousand rupees
to take it back to her village to build
a house suddenly her life savings were
illegal
we've had huge debates two years later
right now this is the big political
discussion taking place in India this
was a forced dis digitalization and it
was forced with a forced with a not just
our Prime Minister saying it but behind
him was a lot of thinking a war on cash
had been declared in a program the u.s.
eight and even before this forced
digitalization was imposed on India Bill
Gates and Microsoft had already made the
programs to make it work just like they
were already ready you know in the
midnight of July 1st 2017 this new
centralized taxation system was created
which made Jeff Bezos the richest I
think if Gates had known it would work
for business he might not have had a
role in this but the GST programs were
already written before the announcement
that the government of India and in each
of them I did a very simple calculation
you know if a hundred rupees is
transacted a hundred times it stays 100
rupees and it still commands the same
amount of resources but digitally it
shifts a hundred times each time the
digital Dyess the financial Giants have
made the two percent six percent
whatever is the percentage on the
transaction that's where the miracle
mysterious money is growing so fast it's
in this false digitalization and since
it is not at all regulated and there's
no taxation it's again the case of the
on ordinary person in India we did not
have to do tax returns if you're earning
was less than a hundred thousand rupees
now even if it's not that much you've to
go through this digital program who can
afford it nobody so you go to hire an
auditor but not a small tax return
auditor because not on paper
it's all on digital programs and that
means that every step the escalation of
cutting off and turning more and more
into an excluded citizens growth when I
started this journey it began with the
seed it began with a sure biotechnology
but now there's this new convergence of
biotechnology the digital technologies
and the financial technologies and this
new convergence means that the ordinary
ways in which we used to organize as
agriculture workers as peasants as women
we had sexual organizing in silos
you know they built silos we responded
to the silos well they've already broken
their silos they're one another five who
will be three next year we don't know
how do we shift how do we organize in a
different way I think the first is we
need to learn from the fact that this
power is a very very volatile power
it's a highly unstable power I have
described it as the extractive economy
that extracted from the earth that
extracted from nature that extracted
from society and put it all on top but
when you take a pyramid and make it an
inverted pyramid it's a very unstable
structure and we are watching that
instability just in the past two weeks
there's a farmer not a farmer he's to
spray roundup in the lawns of a school
his name is Johnson he won a case
against Monsanto by and even when they
wanted an appeal that the case was not
dismissed and the case has been upheld
it's a California case Johnson's case
triggered 8,000 more cases and in a day
by had lost 30% of its capital Manuel
around the same time and I think that
you are linked Blackrock which had
become six point three trillion lost
thirty percent so since it's got no
connection with real processes real
wealth it's it's like a butterfly's wing
one tiny one cancer patient can make
this come toppling down we also know
from every study that the climate crisis
the species extinction crisis which is
being called the sixth mass extinction
are so severe the recent IPCC report has
said twelve years to turnaround for
transformation and the new
Intergovernmental Panel on biodiversity
and ecological services has said ten
years to prevent massive land
degradation massive species extinction
and with the land rental degradation the
uncontrollable uprooting of people which
is also called the refugee crisis which
then has its own multiplier effects so
knowing how wrong things are that
collapse is staring us in the eyes every
alternative becomes that much more
powerful its relevance increases I think
there's a new moment for solidarity
women organize separately youth organize
separately peasants organize separately
consumers organize separately the
unemployed open didn't organize we have
a new moment the same billionaires with
the new tools are talking about you know
first they talk about artificial
intelligence as an inevitable takeover
and a superior substitution of human
intelligence I've written about this in
oneness versus the 1% but they talk
about 99% human beings being disposable
99% disposable and we'll need 1% to
write
algorithms well I think the 99% that
have been declared potentially
disposable are a whole new solidarity
with those who work today and are trying
to defend the right to work the dignity
of work and minimum wages and everything
else that goes with workers rights I
think it is a beautiful moment to
redefine the terms and categories around
two constructions that are so false that
allow this mysterious wealth-- creation
by money money making itself it's when
capital was defined as being the
creative force for wealth creation and
the earth was reduced to land as an
inert input and human beings with all
that creativity all their work were
reduced to labor as another inert input
and these two inert inputs were merely
inputs to the magic of money making I've
called it the money machine I think it
is time to do a new social contract
recognizing that the earth is amazingly
creative she's not dead she's not just
raw material she's alive that's why
she's called Gaia and amazing
self-organized systems is what is what
kept the Earth's climate systems and the
earth temperatures within that level
which made evolution as a species
possible and they keep saying women
don't work they do all the work
society would be over if women didn't
work it's just like they say oh we've
overcome nature if you'd overcome nature
you wouldn't have air to breathe and you
wouldn't have food to eat them you won't
have water to drink all of it eventually
is coming from the earth you might put
it in plastic and then say produced by
coca-cola and this is women of bloody
mana who shut down a coca-cola plant
they say they're stealing our water 1.5
million litres a day and then leaving
what remains toxic because of the
reverse osmosis etc that's required so
youth and women and the earth and the
peasants and the workers and the future
disposable we can all rise in a new eco
social contract of rejuvenating and
regenerating the earth human society and
our communities from the very local all
the way to the planetary I have called
it this new social contract earth
democracy I wrote it after the WTO
meeting collapsed in Seattle in 1999 and
we were repeatedly told all the
anti-globalization oh what they are
against they don't know what they're for
we said we are not anti globalizers
first we are for the earth we have for
democracy we are for society we are for
dignity fear for equality we know what
we are for that's why we are against the
processes that destroy what we love and
I could see how the economies are not
just killing the earth but they are
killing people
they have become genocide economies and
ecocidal economy and that's why we did a
tribunal on Monsanto two years ago in
The Hague on eco Sidon and democracies
as you can see have also been hijacked
and been mutated from being off the
people by the people for the people into
being off the corporations for the
cooperate
by the corporations but which
corporations not all of them but behind
them will haul them the 1% which is
actually the 5 you all must have noticed
how this then mutates into a new
fracturing of society that a dividing
economy must also create the divisions
in society
the divisions and hate we are seeing is
as genetically engineered as the GMO
it's not a natural process just because
people have different faiths it's not
given that will they'll hate and kill
each other
I have watched in my country we watched
it historically when the East India
Company was challenged by the peasant
movement of India 1857 and they were
thrown out and there in the crowd came
back they came out with this recognition
that if the Hindus and Muslims are
united there's no place for us to rule
and so we have to divide them and all
the problems we see today even around
Kashmir the partition my mother became a
refugee are all results of that thing
hasn't gone away Indian politics is
shaped by that the hate politics are
still shaped by that and then you'll
remember that joining of the information
technology and the new robber barons
where Facebook took the communications
of people and then selected from the
communications on Facebook where you're
just talking to your friend then they
sold that data to Cambridge analytical
and with its algorithms Cambridge
analytic ah gave for hate messages to
the president who's the president of the
United States today for his election
campaigning the first was he
of women second was hate of blacks the
third was hate of Muslims and the fourth
was hate of migrants and whom did they
target they targeted the vulnerable the
unemployed worker the farmers and that's
why it's not an accident that those are
the places where the new leadership is
popular and continues to vote including
in the last election the midterm
election has just taken place but who
was voting to create a whole new
leadership look at the women first time
two indigenous women are there first
time to Muslim women are going to be in
US Congress hundred women none of them
professional politicians all of them
with a determination of transformation
and solidarity across all fractures of
religion and color and race we've done
this work around the seed beginning 19
in 87 and beginning with the seeds we
found through the seed we can address
climate change don't have time but I
have a new book called biodiversity agro
ecology and regenerative organic
agriculture which is three decades of
our work in regenerative agriculture
based on biodiversity and its
conservation by conserving seed and
intensifying biodiversity we can grow
two times the food that India needs and
this would work globally the incomes of
our farmers increased tenfold compared
to the commodity growing chemical using
farmers tenfold
in terms of nutrition per acre because
we don't mean measure the yield per acre
we measure the nutrition per acre we can
get rid of all malnutrition both the
malnutrition of the deprivation of food
which is half of India's children are
stunted and wasted but also the
malnutrition of the rest of the food
which is deprived of trace elements
micronutrients antioxidants
phytochemicals which only diversity and
organic food can produce and that's the
new Sciences that are evolving of the
fact that producing food is not plant is
not a machine and fertilizers are not a
fuel but living systems are amazing
organized self complexities intelligent
to the level where one root of one
barley plant has more neurological
activity going on than our brains and in
our gut 100 trillion microbes which is
now called the gut microbiome is now
being called the second brain is the
most sophisticated neurological system
we're just starting to figure this out
on ancient knowledge Ayurveda knew it
they always used to say the gut is the
basis of Health and the basis of disease
and we found that by doing something
simple like protecting biodiversity
farmers rights and doing our duty for
the earth and caring for the earth we
can meet the SDG one to get rid of
poverty we can meet SVD to on zero
hunger we can meet SB g3 on good health
and well-being and I do believe good
health and good food is a fundamental
right unlike what ecological apartheid
and nutritional apartheid is being
created that it's fine for the rich to
have organic and natural but the rest
should be condemned to fake food
artificial food and I am committed that
the rest of my life I will not let that
happen because I think good food is
really a necessity for all and a right
for all I'd like to conclude by sharing
but the conclusion just to extract from
my two books democracy and the new book
so I wrote in a democracy a democracy
connects us through the perennial
renewal and regeneration of life from
our daily life to the life of the
universe a democracy's the universe
story in our times in different places
it pulsates with the limitless potential
of an unfolding universe even while it
addresses the real threats to us
survival as a species it is hope in time
of hopelessness it brings forth peace in
time of wars without end and it
encourages us to love life fiercely and
passionately at a time when leaders and
the media breed hatred and fear and then
from my new book
[Applause]
only as one earth community and one
humanity United in our diversity z' can
we hold ourselves together step away
from the precipice and escape the
destructive ecocidal genocide a rule of
the perfmon percent we can turn around
and walk to our freedom to live free
think free breathe free beat free
[Applause]
[Music]
Oh